It's a...
First, how did you arrive at the name of the
scientist and the location of the plant you wanted
to go to in Germany? Well, before we left the United
States, we had made up a complete list of the
co-hydrogenation plants and the facial trough
plants. People who had... corresponded with the
Germans and had been in Germany and knew the
location of plants. And we had all corresponded
with German scientists of one kind or another
during our experimental work and our early work.
So we had a pretty good idea of the major people that
were going to be involved. And from them we learned
about other people and so on and so on. We started
out with a good itinerary, I think, and then
expanded it as we got into the Germans. Okay. Well,
you seem to know as early as 43 that you're going to
pick these plants out. That seemed awfully early
to me to realize where the plants were
historically. Oh, no. I think we knew the location
of most of the German colonization plants, even in
the late 30s and early 40s. We knew all of that. See,
they're very big plants. And of course, we were
greatly involved in this technology in the Vera
Mines. We had been working on it seven or eight
years in the Vera Mines. So we knew most of this
material. And there had been articles published
about the plants and things like that and their
building and their construction and so on and so
forth. So through the technical literature and
through correspondence and through the
knowledge of these German scientists, we had a
pretty good picture of what we were going to see and
where we were going to see it and who we were going to
see it. Well, I'm amazed, too, that you talk in your
article about the way that bombing slowed down the
production of synthetic fuels. It doesn't seem to
have done that in other industries. Why synthetic
fuels?
I can't answer that question completely, but I
think it was because they did know the location of
the plants, and they were very big plants. And
the Americans took over that daylight bombing,
and I think they got over these plants and hit them
very, very heavily. So the time we got over there, a
lot of these plants were a wreck, really. What did
the British do exactly? Were they all alone from
the planning from 43 on and going into these plans?
And did they take separate or duplicate records?
The British, when we were organizing our teams
here in the United States in late 43, I guess it was,
wait a minute, the war ended in 45, didn't it?
Mm-hmm. In late, in 44 and early 45 when we were
organizing our teams in this country, the British
were doing the same thing. They were organizing
teams in Great Britain to go into these plants. And
you know the British had one coal hydrogenation
plant at Billingham, England that was already
operating. And they had, they had corresponded
with IG Farben to a very large extent. And in fact, I
think IG Farber had assisted the British in the
design of this plant, probably to some extent in
construction. So the British were very familiar
with what was going on in Germany, and they
organized their own teams. Actually, when we got
into the field, we were often combined. It often
was a team made up of partly British and partly
Americans, or it might have been a complete
American team, or it might be a complete British
team. But we work cooperatively throughout. And a
lot of the reports are written by partly British
and partly American. Well, did they select a
different sort of records to take back to Britain,
I wonder? No, I think we all had pretty much the same
records. And I think they had copies of all of our
reports, and we had copies of all of their reports.
How did you decide which material to eliminate
when you wrote your reports? you speak of
eliminating some material.
I don't remember that we eliminated much of
anything. We tried to
cover in our own reports practically every phase
of technology which had any new aspects to
it. In addition to that, we often brought back
German documents as supplementary to what we had
written and so on and so on. But
I really don't remember that there was any process
of elimination except that we might decide that
The material that we saw in the file or something
like that was routine records, business records,
and things like that. And we dropped those because
they had no technologic interest to us at all.
Those we didn't care about. We didn't care whether
the Germans sold 10,000 tons a day or whether they
sold 1,000 tons a day or who paid for it. Yeah, I
should have jotted the page down, but you say
you're talking about in 1945, you're talking
about difficulties you're going to have in
assuming this material, absorbing this material
and releasing it later on, and you talk about the
volume material and you say, well, some was... was
automatically eliminated. Well, I think it was.
But I think it was largely routine material that we
felt added nothing to our understanding of the
plants or the technology. OK. Along that line, and
it says
you talk about all microfilming is really what
you're talking about. And Odell, is that how you
pronounce his name? Odell. Odell, OK. and Odell is
discussing a process, and you say, well, I suppose
all this is getting microfilmed, or we're getting
copies of the microfilm, and you say just certain
copies of the microfilm. In the cases of Mr.
Odell's report, we know that he has written it from
notes taken immediately on the field and placed
very little reliance upon the microfilms. And I
really couldn't understand exactly, it's
talking about carbon dioxide content in a, and
slagging units is in the capacity. I really
couldn't understand exactly what that had to do
with report writing. Is that were most of the
reports written from the field notes or most of
them from the microfilm documents? Most of them
were written from the field notes. From the field
notes. Yeah. And then did you go back later on and
check the microfilm documents?
That, I guess, was up to the individual authors. In
some cases, I think they probably did. In some
cases, they probably didn't.
Well, it seems to me there's a tremendous, the best
I can tell from everything, there's a tremendous
amount of microfilm documents. And I'm having a
very hard time sorting through and seeing what the
follow-up was. I can't at all feel certain that the
microfilms were extensively relied upon in
writing these reports. I think it was mostly field
notes.
How were the original 23 investigators chosen who
went to Germany? We had meetings here in
Washington
between the oil people and mainly the Bureau of
Mines and some of the people in the Department of
Interior. And all of those meetings, there were
four or five of those meetings, Out of those
meetings, the oil people suggested certain
people that they wanted, thought to be qualified
for the mission. Bear in mind, they suggested a
number of people, and out of that came the first 23
people. Yeah, there seems an argument evolves,
best I can tell. The argument seems to evolve here.
Some people agree to go and then back up, and some
people join later on. I think that's right. Was
there some sort of a complication? I don't think
there was any complication. I think oftentimes it
was a question of the man's, well, first, how badly
he was needed here in the United States. Could he
give up the time to go on a month or two expedition
into Germany? And then it was a few questions of
people's age and health that were involved. Did
you attend the 1941 meeting with Hickeys when it
calls together 1,000 of the most prominent men in
the oil industry? No.
All right. Obviously, your scrapbook has
demonstrated you began earlier than I thought you
did, so I'm not sure that question is relevant
anymore. But I was wondering, as early as 1941
then, he's already calling forth 1,000 people
from the oil industry to talk about synthetic
fuels? Yeah, I expect so. Who was C.S. Snodgrass?
Snodgrass was in the Trojan War. Petroleum
Administration for War, is that right? Yeah.
Snodgrass was, I don't remember his exact
position, but he was in the Petroleum
Administration for War and took a very active part
in organizing these teams and so on and so forth.
And he knew the Petroleum Industry well, and he
knew the Department of Interior fairly well.
Actually, Snodgrass was a very good friend of
mine. Well, I don't know whether he's still in it or
not. I
was going to ask you if you knew Snodgrass now.
You've already answered that question. Is he the
one who brings you actively into this synthetic
oil search? No, no, I think I wouldn't say that, but
he brought a lot of the oil people into the search.
Describe him. What was he like? What's his
background? I can't find anything out about him.
He's His background was, he had been, I can't give
you too much of his background to tell you the
truth. He had been in the oil industry for quite a
while and he knew quite a lot of the technology of
the oil and gas industry and had quite a bit of
administrative experience. And then I don't know
exactly how he got into the Petroleum
Administration for War, but I'm sure it's through
one of the outcome is that he appears in the
Petroleum Administration for War. Why was the
military not included in this search from the
beginning? Now, the Navy evidently is very
interested. Why not the Army? The Navy
decided to organize their own group of people to go
over there and investigate synthetic films. And
Pettyjohn, the man you're going to see, he was head
of the Institute of Gas Technology. Pettyjohn was
a commander, I believe, in the Navy, and was very
active in the Navy. And he got into this fairly
early, and he thought that a military team,
particularly a Navy team, could do a better job
than a civilian team. And in a way, the two teams
competed they covered somewhat the same targets
we covered and i don't know what happened to their
documents did they write reports too yes i'm sure
they did okay and uh
now what what i need to do now is to go over these
charts which i have labeled one two and three and
they're obviously your charts because there were
some things about going over the charts i couldn't
understand from a You know exactly how advice and
so forth put in. Chart one is called the
Organizational Structure for the Oil Mission in
1944 and 1945.
Now here you see, this is where the Fuels and
Lubricants Subcommittee, where Snodgaris is
chairman. A Technical Industrial Intelligence
Committee. Now were these people from the oil
industry itself, or was this you? No, I think that
was mainly from the oil industry. But it might also
have included some government people, but I was
not on it. I was not on it. And then here's CIOs, you
know, the Combined Intelligence Objectives
Committee. All right, now, so is the technical oil
mission feeding information both to the TIIC and
to the CIOS? I suspect so. OK. So information flows
both ways. Both ways. Both ways.
Now, and then the TIIC, what relationship does it
have to the Fuels and Lubricants Subcommittee? Is
this a directive? I think this is part of the
technical. Oh, OK. Yeah. All right, I see. And I
didn't even remember that Snodgrass was chairman
of that, but I think I do now that you note it here.
All right, and so. Comforth, I had forgotten
completely. He,
however.
I remember this faintly now.
Petty John and his group in the Navy went over there
as a Navy group, and I think they had their path more
or less laid out as a Navy group, and didn't have
much trouble getting over there. We, on the other
hand, were all civilians. and we had no business in
the war zone. So we had to be
taken in in the Army on some status or another, and
we had to have uniforms and so on and so forth, so we
weren't arrested for spies over there, some darn
thing like that. And Comforth, it seems to me that
he arranged most of this stuff with the, through
the Army so that we could be processed through the
Army and could fly over there and could fly into the
combat zones and so on and so forth. All right.
You're forcing me to rely heavily on 30 years ago.
Oh, I know it's hard to do. All right. It says
Combined Intelligence Objective Subcommittee,
all right, which is, you know, again, CIOS. This is
from Britain. The Bureau of Mines, all right?
Yeah, right. All right. Now then, and out of here
come the translated reports. But the Combined
Intelligence Objective Subcommittee included
not only people from the Bureau of Mines, but also
the people from the oil industry. All right, so the
oil industry was involved in, in the Combined
Intelligence Subcommittee here. And
then it was from this work to the Translated
Reports King. Now, it says 306 rolls of microfilm,
which were German. And they go to the Library of
Congress. And from the Library of Congress,
they're to go out to industry. Now, are these the
reels of microfilm from which a series of five
indexes were published?
I never saw those microfilms. I knew we were making
microfilms, but I never saw them. Okay. And then
the translated reports go on into the American
Petroleum Institute technical oil mission.
Yeah, right. Now, what does the film study groups
do? I couldn't understand how they fit into
dissemination of information. I don't know that
either. See, when I came back here, and probably a
lot of that film studying was done back here in the
United States, I wasn't involved in that because I
went back to my old task of running synthetic fuels
for the Bureau of Mines. Oh, okay. So while I knew a
lot about this, I knew this was all going on, and I
knew the reports were all being edited and that
they had a technical group, which included some of
the Bureau of Mines people, but was mainly
petroleum people. and that they were trying to get
out final reports on this thing. And that's the way
it was done. Let's see if we've got any. Have you got
any of the old reports? Yeah, yeah. I've got some.
You know how they're put together and so on and so
forth. Well, let me see if I've got some here.
One thing here on tape. Come on now. There we go.
Now, I realize there was a close contact between
Standard Oil and Farben. I didn't realize there
was a contact between the British and the German
synthetic oil production. I wonder when that
develops. Well, that must have started, the
British started their work on coal
hydrogenation, if my memory serves me well, about
the early 1930s, 31 or 32. And that was all started
at Billingham, England, just in the northeastern
part of England. And then later on, the British
built a coal-hydrogenation plant. And I think
this was essentially after the Burgess design and
followed closely the types of plants that were
being built in Germany at that point. And they ran
that plant for several years prior to the war. I
think they were working on coal-hydrogenation
then. But then during the war, I think they went
over to tar-hydrogenation because they could get
more products out there. And they used that plant
to make aviation gasoline during the war. And I'm
sure people like Kenneth Gordon and so on and so
forth, and Holroyd, who were with ICI, were well
acquainted with the people in Germany who were
doing the work on co-hydrogenation.
And don't forget, Dr. Calvert, what's your first
name? Bob. Bob, I knew that. And don't forget
that...
that this whole German technology had been
evolving over a period of 20 years. And of course,
the people who were interested in coal work were
well aware of what the Germans were doing all this
20 year period of time. And then when it finally
evolved, I think they put up their first plant in
about 1925. So there was great technical interest
in that plant. And the British, I think the British
thought that Great Britain has never had any
substantial supply of oil until they brought in
the North Sea oil. And I think the British thought
that they would eventually be producing oil from
coal in England. The situation has turned out to be
quite different really, but that's what they
thought at that time. So that was why they built
that first coal hydrogenation plant.
So the translated reports go to the American
Petroleum Institute of Technical Oil and Mission
Study Group. And this says Publication Board of
Department of Commerce to Industry.
This group, I think you told me, and as I remember,
was headed by Al Miller from Sinclair Oil Company
at that time. They've since gone into another.
Who's Sinclair going to? I don't know. I never can
remember. I can never remember the combination
either. But that group functioned for a couple of
years. And then it was going to break up. And at that
time, the Department of Commerce decided that
they would become the depository for these
reports. And I think they also distributed a lot of
these reports for people who wanted them later on.
And later on, it broke up. And then I don't know what
happened to the rest of it. to the story. OK. And
then so I see then, so the reports translated here,
went here, and then on to industry as industry
called for them. Yeah, right, right. Now, I
had a terrible time with this one. Our Petroleum
Administration for the War, Secretary of
Interior, Ickes. I can understand that. Now, the
Petroleum Industry War Council I wonder what in
the world it did with William R. Boyd as chairman.
I didn't remember. I guess Boyd was chairman. I
didn't know that. I was never in on any meetings of
the Petroleum Industry War Council. But they
advised the Department of Interior, and I think
the government generally, As to the oil situation
and supplying the allies with oil and moving oil
around this country and meeting the submarine
threat and transporting oil from your state of
Texas up to the east, you remember the submarines
were sinking ships at a hell of a rate there. And I
think this group was trying to coordinate the
petroleum industry with the war effort, largely
done through ICAS. Okay. All right. And then we
have technical committees and technical
advisories. R.E. Wilson at that time, he was
president of the Standard Oil Company of Indiana,
as I remember it.
And I really don't know what his function was,
because these were committees that I was not
involved with. Okay, but what about the special
advisory group down here in 1945?
I wasn't involved. You weren't involved in that?
No. OK. I have you somehow connected with the
Special Advisory Bureau. I don't know why I put it.
What I was trying to, interesting in finding it. I
think the thing you've got to distinguish here is
that a lot of this is connected with the oil
industry. And in general, I had little or no
contact with the oil industry, other than
meetings and so on and so forth, occasional
meetings. See, we were pretty much involved in
synthetic fuels, not oil problems.
Now, I only have one other question from this
technical oil mission meeting that I couldn't
understand.
And between 45 and 47, there's a sizable amount of
work to be done, as you point out, in December of 45
until 47 when these reports begin to come out.
I assume that in that period when these mission
documents were team written for all practical
purposes,
that they must have then is when they must have gone
through flow records and... Yes, I did. Okay. Then
it's when you went back and looked over... We went
through the flow records and we went through
laboratory records and we went through
technology, small scale and large scale, and it
was all written up in these reports. And then the
reports come out in 47. Did you ever feel called
upon to go back and check these reports? No, I never
did go back and check. But now other people may
have. Al Miller and his group, he had a group of
people working with him, and they may have done a
lot of rechecking on this stuff, but I didn't know
about that.
All right. Now, you say you picked eight
specialization groups of three to 11 persons, in
effect, go into these plants to look them over. I
didn't know there were eight groups, but you may be
right. Well, that's what I say here in this paper. I
don't know whether it's right or not. Probably
reasonably right. All right.
If that's true, then what kind of aid
specialization groups would you pick? What sort
of specialization groups are they talking about?
Would this be engineers, chemical engineers,
plant managers? Is that the kind of team you tried
to put together? What I'm trying to find out is what
sort of team did you put together and did you pick
on?
Well, it was a very chaotic, and I would say, not
particularly precise arrangement, we would
generally
try to get maybe one good chemical man and one plant
man and
perhaps one man who had had a lot of process
experience to go to a given plant to look the thing
over and begin the preliminary report on it. And we
would expect that team of maybe three or four or
five people to at least write one report. Now, that
report was then discussed at meeting of the team
members, and probably from that we might decide
whether we should go back there and investigate
certain phases of it that weren't covered in the
first report and so on and so forth. Teams were
scattered all over Europe. Our meetings were
never on any definite scheduled basis.
When the reports were out, I'm sure that not all the
team members in Germany had a chance to read it. And
so it was a very loose sort of an arrangement, you
know. And it might often involve just who was
available in Brussels or London to go on a specific
mission. I thought that was probably what it was. I
also
suspect that a lot of the team members did not see
reports that other team members had written until
we were back here in the United States.
Was the fuel and lubricant subcommittee
controversial?
No, I don't believe so. I don't believe there was
any question of controversy. Well, there's...
Unless there's some things I missed. You see, part
of the time I was in the field doing investigations
of the plants and so on and so forth. And at times
like that, I was not very well aware of what was
happening in London where the central
organization was trying to function and to send
the teams out and so on and so forth. Who was Dr. T.G.
Delbridge?
Delbridge was a man from the Atlantic Refining
Company. And I don't think he went on the missions,
did he? No. He evidently is... But I think
Delbridge was a very knowledgeable man. He was a
very good technical man. And I think Delbridge
suggested to us a lot of members from the petroleum
industry that might be useful on these missions.
He writes a report in August of 1944 for the
Technical Industrial Intelligence Committee
that seems to give some direction to what you're
looking for in Germany. I wouldn't be surprised.
He was a considerably older man than I was at that
time, and he knew the industry well, and he knew the
technology well, and I'm sure that he might well
have written reports about it.